In this video, we're going to
look at splitting
columns and creating
custom columns using features
available in Power Query 2016.
In the previous video, we
created a query to work
out how much we'd spent
on training in June.
We now need to go
one step further,
work out our total spend for Q2,
and whether or not
we are over budget.
To do that, we're
going to need to get
the training budget data,
which looks like this.
But let's start off
in our main workbook,
and make sure you're on the
budget sheet and in A3.
Let's go get our data.
We come into the Data ribbon,
New Query or Get Data,
From File, and from Workbook.
We're then going to
get the file Training
Budget Alt and double-click.
The data is sitting
in the Budget1 table,
so make sure you've
selected the table,
and then transform or edit.
Now you've probably guessed
that we're going to need to do
a merge between this query
and our June spend query.
But at the moment, we can't do it
because we need to
match branch and
department and they're
both sitting in
the same column with
the cost center code.
Step one, we're going to
need to split those out.
Fortunately, we have a
great tool for doing that.
Select Cost Center, and then on
the Home ribbon or on
the Transform ribbon,
you will find a
Split Column button
and it works the same
on either ribbon,
so it doesn't make
any difference.
Find the split
column, click on it.
We're trying to split
every time we find a dash.
That is called a delimiter.
We're going to
choose By Delimiter.
Power Query has
picked it up for us
automatically, but if it doesn't,
you can click the
dropdown and choose
your own delimiter or
typing your own custom.
Now we want each occurrence
of the delimiter.
We're going to click "Okay"
and all columns are
beautifully split.
One more thing we should do is
probably name them properly.
Now, sometimes Power Query
adds additional steps.
You can see here it's added
one to change the type.
If yours has done the
same, please remove that,
make sure you're back on the step
that splits the
column by delimiter.
We're going to edit that step
to give our columns better names.
Instead of "Cost Center.1",
I'm going to call that "Branch".
"Cost center.2" is going
to be "Department".
The last one is going to
be "Cost Center Code".
Then you can just click
the little tick or
press "Enter" to
complete the step.
That data is looking great
and I'm ready to do my merge.
You just click into one
of the cells in the grid.
Come to your Home ribbon
and we're going to
merge with this query,
so I'm just going to select the
main "Merge Queries" button.
You can see this is my table
on the left is my Budget1.
The right-hand side
is going to be my
"Enrollments" query that
I created previously.
I need to match branch
and department,
so I'm going to select
Branch and Branch,
but then to select department,
I'm going to hold down my control
key and I'll select
Department and Department.
You can match multiple fields.
You just have to use control.
It is a left outer join,
so nothing to change there.
I'm going to click "Okay".
Now it's done the merge and
I need to expand
enrollments on the right.
Coming up to my
little expand icon,
the only column I
want is June's Spend,
and I don't want to
prefix, so unselect that.
I'm going to click "Okay".
Now that's curious, it
hasn't found a single match.
The reason for that is that
the branch and the
department case,
in other words, the
uppercase and lowercase,
do not match in the two queries.
That is something really
important to be aware of,
merge queries are case sensitive.
What I need to do
is adjust the case
so the first letter is
capitalized in each case.
Now actually that's
very easy to do,
but we need to do it
before we do the merge.
Can you click on the step
before the merge queries
whichever step it is,
and then hold your
shift key down so you
select "Branch" and "Department".
Then coming to your
Transform ribbon,
we're going to look
for the Format button.
Now be aware there's
a format button on
Transform and on Add Column.
The one on Add Column is
actually a bit different.
That will change the case
and create a new column.
That's not what we want to do.
We want to actually alter
the existing columns.
Make sure we're on
the Transform ribbon,
come to format, and we want
to capitalize each word.
It's going to insert a
step, which is fine.
We're going to click "Insert".
It has changed the case.
Now, check your last step in
your applied steps window and
you'll see wherever
it found a match,
it has brought the value
through, so that's great.
You'll notice where
it didn't find
a match, it puts a null.
Now often we can ignore that.
But in the next step,
I actually want to
add up these three columns.
Nulls do not work like zeros.
If you try and add with a null,
you get a null result.
We are actually going
to need to fix that.
Start by selecting
your "April" column,
hold shift down
and select "June",
because we're going to adjust
all of them just in case.
Then on the Transform ribbon,
we're looking for replace values.
We're going to replace null
with zero and press "Enter".
Great. We can now add up
our three months spending
to get our Q2 total.
For this, we're going
to come to Add Column.
I'm going to add a custom column.
We're going to call it Q2 Spend.
Then clicking in the Formula bar,
we just need to add up
those three columns.
Double-click "April Spend"
plus double-click "May"
plus double-click "June" and
don't put a plus on the
end because it will error,
and then we're going
to click "Okay".
There's our total spending.
We are now ready to work out
if we have gone over budget.
For this, we're going to
use another custom column,
but instead of simple arithmetic,
we're going to use
an if statement.
It's similar to an if
function in Excel,
but you'll see the awesome
slight differences.
On the Add Column,
click "Custom Column".
This column will be
called Over Budget.
Then click into your Formula bar.
I'm going to start with an
if and a space rather
than a bracket.
Now we want to check
if our Q2 Spend,
I'm going to double-click
"Q2 spend" and space,
is greater than, and
another space and double-click
"Quarterly budget".
That makes sense. But now, again,
different to an Excel function,
we're going to type
a then statement.
If that is greater than that,
then we want to
see the text over.
Open your double-quotes and note
it closes them for
you, which is handy.
After that, we can specify what
we want it to do
if it's not true.
I'm going to turn my caps
off and we type an else.
If then else, it's not true,
we're just going to leave a null.
This time it's going to be fine.
Now just make sure you've
got no syntax errors.
I'll leave that up
there for a moment
so you can double-check
your formula.
Then when you're done, you're
going to click "Okay".
We can now see which of
the department branches
are overbudget.
We're ready to close and load,
so back on our Home ribbon,
Close and Load,
Close and Load too.
It's going to be existing
Worksheet A3 and click "Okay".
Some amazingly powerful
business problems we can solve
using custom columns and
split columns in
our query editor.
That brings us to the end of
our section on Power Query.
But next week, we're
going to look at
some other amazingly
powerful features
called Power Pivot,
the Data Model, and DAX.
Look forward to seeing you there.